At In Situ inside the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, the chef Corey Lee faithfully replicates dishes dreamed up by Sean Brock, Alice Waters and other innovators. None of the recipes are his own. Here is the back story behind some of the dishes currently on the menu.
The chef Mauro Colagreco fashioned this dish to reflect, in taste and look, the woods outside his restaurant on the French Riviera. The moss is a parsley-juice spongecake cooked in a microwave, the barklike curls are fried sunchoke peels, and the mushrooms change to reflect what his foragers pull out of the forest. Some recipes at In Situ are followed to the letter, but Mr. Colagreco gave Corey Lee permission to choose mushrooms that were in season in Northern California. “Understanding the point of the dish is really helpful in being able to execute it,” Mr. Lee said.
A very early example of René Redzepi’s curiosity about weeds, the dessert came together after he saw clumps of wild wood sorrel growing in the pastures of the farm that sold him sheep’s milk. Tart juice from the leaves is frozen and scraped into a granita that sits next to yogurt mousse with a thin clear lid of anise-seed brittle.

Tasting a Sichuan-flavored pork sauce that one of his cooks, Joshua McFadden, was fooling around with, David Chang realized, “This guy just did a Chinese ragù.” From there it was a short step to an amplified mapo-tofu with sliced rice sticks, a dish that has never left the menu.

From the restaurant’s final year, shrimp grits are a textbook case of Wylie Dufresne’s mission to take dishes apart and put the pieces back together in a new way. There are none of the science lab tricks many people associate with Mr. Dufresne: The “grits” are shrimp, repeatedly ground and fried, the last time with dehydrated sweet corn. Pickled jalapeño slices poke up out of the grits, which are ringed by red oil made from shrimp shells.
Central’s chef, Virgilio Martínez, wanted “to show the octopus in its natural habitat,” Mr. Lee said. Dried egg-white wafers and a tuile made from rice and squid ink mimic the coral reef. The octopus has not made the transition from nature in one piece, unfortunately; it’s been braised and then glazed in a mixture of mussel reduction with four kinds of leche de tigre, the potent marinade for Peruvian ceviche.
Meyer lemons in three forms figure in this perennial dessert from Alice Waters’s restaurant, which made them a household name. Packed into a hollow lemon shell are one scoop of ice cream and one of sherbet, decorated with candied lemon zest and served with delicate cat’s tongue cookies.