Visitors frequently ask me where to eat in Atlanta. Solid picks are spread throughout the several counties that make up the greater Atlanta region. You could make a day of it just driving up and down Buford Highway eating pho and kimchi and exploring markets that sell everything that a cook from Ethiopia or Bombay may need. But for people in town for just a meal or two, I usually offer them options inside the city.

Billy Allin’s pitch-perfect Decatur restaurant is iconoclastic but draws from the South’s pantry. “He’s so talented and stubborn and everything a chef should be,” said Anne Quatrano, whose own fleet of restaurants (Bacchanalia, Little Bacch, Floataway Café and Star Provisions) are all stand-up options, too.

Atlanta isn’t really a barbecue town. For that, you may want to head to North Carolina or Texas. But pulled pork and macaroni and cheese made with penne and three cheeses will satisfy.

The chef Todd Ginsberg created an oasis of a Jewish deli that does dinner, too. Get one of the best bagels in the South, hand-cut pastrami and a righteous cheeseburger. (The lunch menu version is better than dinner.) Shalom, y’all.

This odd little restaurant and bar is where Greg Best and Paul Calvert, whom many say are the best in the city, work magic. David Bies cooks food that is both old fashioned and innovative, with dishes that vary from Hasselback potatoes to papaya and butternut salad with maple nuoc mam. Bonus: A trip here offers a chance to explore the Krog Street Market, one of Atlanta’s new food halls.

A lunch spot that has been making food since 1947, and anyone who knows anything about Atlanta politics and Southern cooking has paid a visit. It’s a meat and three to love. And it’s almost always busy.

Kevin Gillespie’s loud, rapid-fire Gunshow, where you can get a crazy take on beef Wellington or duck legs in red curry brought out dim sum style, would be just as at home in Brooklyn. And Ryan Smith’s five-course tasting menu at Staplehouse would be just as at home in Manhattan.

Steven Satterfield’s menu shows off the best of the South’s okra, field peas, turnips and tomatoes in a style that would make Alice Waters weak in the knees. Perfect for a date night or lunch at the counter, where one can explore an innovative wine list with pours by the glass.

With the help of the beloved Atlanta restaurant veteran Gerry Klaskala, the chef Christopher Grossman accents trout with peanuts and young Vidalia onions, and plates truffle dumplings with Wagyu beef. The walls are often filled with paintings by Picasso and Matisse from the British billionaire Joe Lewis’s collection. This is luxe Buckhead dining at its best. You can even drop $2,900 on a bottle of Screaming Eagle.

Although Atlanta has a surprisingly big Japanese population, sushi isn’t the first thing that comes to mind. Much of it is overwrought and sloppy, but at Umi, fish (and plenty of other ingredients) get the respect they deserve from the chef Fuyuhiko Ito. The modern room is exciting, as is Umi’s new moody cocktail lounge, called Himitsu, shown above. It requires a reservation and code to enter and has Shingo Gokan practicing the strict ritual of Japanese bartending in an American way.

Atlanta isn’t a town built on great Italian restaurants, which makes this little neighborhood pasta kingdom run by Bruce Logue so great. His marriage of mortadella and octopus is a master class in texture management.

Asha Gomez makes the case that the American South and her homeland, India’s southern Kerala region, have much in common. Her philosophy is on display in this serene little spot on the edge of an old textile factory turned condominium complex. It’s a little like an Indian version of a meat and three, with Kerala-inspired fried chicken and samosas made with a loving hand. Don’t skip dessert; she may have black-pepper carrot cake or the mango upside-down cake.

Ignore the silly mini-golf putting green outside. This repurposed factory warehouse from Ford Fry shows off fat Georgia shrimp in a bath of arbol chile butter and lime, and treats Georgia scallops and Florida grouper with simplicity and respect. Fish from northern waters is on the menu, too.

