Five basic types of sauces appear over and over again on menus and in cookbooks that feature the kind of vegetable-heavy, flavor-dense food that cooks and eaters favor today: yogurt sauce, pepper sauce, herb sauce, tahini sauce and pesto. Master each one, and you’ll immediately have access to the dozens of variations that descend from them, too.

Quite conveniently, plain yogurt itself is already a simple sauce. But with a few minutes more, you can use it as the base of a sauce to spoon over roasted salmon; or kebabs made with lamb, chicken or fish; or basmati rice, quinoa or couscous. Spoon into puréed soups and shell beans just before serving. Or thin with a little water to make a creamy dressing for romaine or little gem lettuces. Make carrot raita, an Indian version of the sauce, to drizzle over spicy roasted eggplant, or serve a bowl of Persian cucumber yogurt alongside grilled chicken or lamb.

For millennia, dried peppers have found their way into sauces around the world, and the method for using them is more or less the same. Toast them, or not. Seed them, or not. Then rehydrate, purée with a roasted tomato or two, and strain. Spoon this sauce over eggs, beans, pork chops or roast chicken. Or toss stewed shredded chicken, pork or beef with an abundant amount of sauce for a spicy filling for tacos or enchiladas. Add a few smoked chiles for a smoky salsa. Add olive oil, caraway, cumin and vinegar for Moroccan harissa. Or add chopped, toasted hazelnuts and almonds for Catalunyan romesco sauce.

Cooks around the world have long known that chopped herbs mixed with oil, acid and a pinch of salt will improve pretty much any dish. Start with this basic herb sauce, which can be served alongside any grilled fish, shellfish or meat. Use it as a garnish for rice, quinoa or farro. Drizzle over roasted sweet potatoes, carrots and beets. Spoon over poached eggs and hash. Then tinker. Add capers and anchovies for an Italian salsa verde to serve with grilled bistecca alla Fiorentina. Or use chopped olives and preserved lemon to make tapenade, a good partner for grilled lamb or octopus. Switch out the parsley and vinegar for cilantro, lime, ginger and cumin and make North African chermoula sauce, to serve alongside spiced chickpeas, shakshuka or couscous.

Tahini, or toasted sesame seed paste, and the basic emulsified sauce made by whipping it together with lemon juice, garlic and water, are staples throughout the Middle East, Turkey, Greece and Cyprus. According to the chef Michael Solomonov, it is “the Israeli mother sauce.” It’s eaten all over the place: with grilled meat, on vegetables, or as a salad dressing or mayonnaise substitute. “My favorite way to eat it at home is on cold chicken schnitzel sandwiches on a Martin’s potato roll,” Mr. Solomonov said. “It’s like the best thing you’ve ever had in your life.”

You could use the sauce as a garnish for roast chicken and lamb. Dress raw kale and toasted pumpkin seeds with it for a simple salad. Drizzle it over sliced tomatoes and cucumbers. Or serve with grilled eggplant, zucchini and peppers, or roasted carrots and cauliflower. Blend in herbs to make for Mr. Solomonov’s refreshing green tahini sauce. Or evoke Japanese cuisine by combining tahini paste with rice wine vinegar and a few drops of toasted sesame oil to make a dressing for blanched green beans, broccoli or spinach.

Named for the pounding involved in its production, pesto is the most rustic of the new mother sauces. The key to making creamy pesto is to add the ingredients to the food processor in the right order to ensure that the nuts break down to a fine paste before the greens have a chance to turn brown. Based on a 130-year-old recipe from Liguria, the birthplace of pesto, this version of the sauce is packed with nuts and cheese. As a result, the texture is lush and the flavor balanced; the salt and acid from the cheese balance the sweetness of the basil and the richness of the olive oil.

Use basic basil pesto as a pasta sauce, or thin it out with a little oil to drizzle it over steak, chicken, fish, pizza or tomato salad. Replace the basil with sautéed wild nettles or broccoli rabe for a heartier sauce. Make mint-pistachio pesto to add vibrancy to spring vegetables and shellfish dishes. Tinker with the herbs and nuts and add various spices to evoke the flavors of cuisines around the world.

Named for the pounding involved in its production, pesto is the most rustic of the new mother sauces. The key to making creamy pesto is to add the ingredients to the food processor in the right order to ensure that the nuts break down to a fine paste before the greens have a chance to turn brown. Based on a 130-year-old recipe from Liguria, the birthplace of pesto, this version of the sauce is packed with nuts and cheese. As a result, the texture is lush and the flavor balanced; the salt and acid from the cheese balance the sweetness of the basil and the richness of the olive oil.

Use basic basil pesto as a pasta sauce, or thin it out with a little oil to drizzle it over steak, chicken, fish, pizza or tomato salad. Replace the basil with sautéed wild nettles or broccoli rabe for a heartier sauce. Make mint-pistachio pesto to add vibrancy to spring vegetables and shellfish dishes. Tinker with the herbs and nuts and add various spices to evoke the flavors of cuisines around the world.
