A new crop of food halls and markets will expand shopping options in New York this fall. Some, like A&E Supply Company, White Gold Butchers and Kreuther Handcrafted Chocolate, are attached to restaurants, while others are food halls with multiple vendors.
Marc Aumont, the pastry chef at Gabriel Kreuther, is in charge of Kreuther Handcrafted Chocolate, a spacious boutique next door. Mr. Aumont said he was elevating the chocolatier’s craft but not manufacturing the chocolate the way some bean-to-bar companies do. “If I made shoes, would I also have to produce the leather?” he said by way of explanation. Shoppers, and those who linger at the cafe tables there, can watch the chocolates being made. Some are thematic: A peanut-butter ganache with a touch of pretzel crunch is part of an Americana collection.
“White gold” is a term that butchers use for the rich, flavorful fat in cuts of meat. It certainly won’t go to waste in the hands of the butchers Jocelyn Guest and Erika Nakamura in this meat market and restaurant from April Bloomfield and Ken Friedman called White Gold Butchers. For Ms. Guest and Ms. Nakamura, it is a vast improvement over the cramped quarters they occupied in the basement of Salvation Burger, where they were butchering entire carcasses and grinding meat for burgers. Now they’ll do that work in this new butcher space, which will serve several of Ms. Bloomfield’s restaurants. Locally raised meats along with smoked, spit-roasted and cured items and sandwiches from the chef Robert Flaherty are on the menu. “There will be plenty of choices to create a full dinner,” Ms. Guest said. Beer, wine, kombucha and cold brew on tap are available for shoppers as well as diners in the restaurant area.
Residents in a part of Brooklyn that is a cultural hub, but with meager dining options, will surely roll out the welcome mat for Gotham Market, a sibling of the food hall in Hell’s Kitchen, housed in a shiny new high-rise apartment building near the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Among the options are rotisserie chicken from Flip Bird and wood-fired pizzas from Apizza Regionale, both by John Stage of Dinosaur Bar-B-Que, who will also run the central bar.
The first iteration of A&E Supply Company, a Gowanus venture from the chef Adam Harvey and his partner, Ennio Di Nino, is a coffee counter. The men, both alumni of Danny Meyer restaurants, then have plans to sell cheeses and meats before finally opening a casual restaurant for brunch and dinner. Mr. Harvey said one of his goals was to provide high-quality meats to a neighborhood that is now underserved. Beers will be from New York State producers.
Canal Street Market, a new market hall in a handsome building on the edge of Chinatown, will feature about a dozen food vendors, many of them serving Asian fare. Yori Nori will specialize in colorful Korean kimbap, Boba Guys dispenses bubble tea, Davey’s Ice Cream offers inventive flavors like speculoos chocolate chip, and Dessert Lab will have treats from guest chefs. Booths for artisan-made clothing, accessories and household goods are also planned for the 12,000-square-foot space.
Colson Patisserie in Park Slope (its whole-wheat croissant is a favorite of Mayor Bill de Blasio) is expanding its kitchen space in Industry City to better serve the cafes, hotels and other clients that clamor for its pastries. Like many of the other culinary tenants there, Colson will have a cafe open to the public. The owners, Yonatan Israel (right) and Andrew Hackel (left), plan to serve sandwiches, quiches and salads along with the pastries.