In a year dominated by the presidential election, the readers of the Food section flocked to articles about the basics. Cooking tricks, forgotten recipes and a secret-recipe snafu found large audiences. There was news to entice, of course, and profiles of celebrities and those thrust unexpectedly into the spotlight. And at the top, one very popular restaurant review. Here are the 12 most-read Food stories and columns in 2016, along with some of the most popular reader comments.

Christopher Kimball left America’s Test Kitchen in 2015 and started a new venture, Milk Street Kitchen. In October, months after the profile was published, America’s Test Kitchen sued Mr. Kimball, alleging a conspiracy to “literally and conceptually rip off” the Boston-based television, radio and publishing empire.

When Sam Beall, the man behind the Tennessee resort Blackberry Farm, died in a ski accident in February, the future of the luxury resort was in doubt. Mary Celeste Beall, his widow, is grappling with raising their five children and running the resort as the proprietor and president.

Alton Brown is full of contradictions, and this profile of the TV personality spelled many of them out.

The secret to perfect toast is freezing slices of the best bread you’re able to buy and toasting the frozen slices as you need them.

This exploration of the alchemy of flour, water, wild yeast and lactobacilli, and how that sourdough starter can fundamentally change baking and breakfast waffles, captivated readers.

Americans all come from somewhere, and this multimedia story detailed how 15 families celebrate their roots on the Thanksgiving table.

Prepared and served whole, cauliflower behaves very much like roasted meat as a centerpiece to be carved at the table.

It’s much easier to make bad coffee than good coffee, but if you follow these three steps, the good stuff will become daily habit.

KFC’s secret recipe revealed? Tribune shown family scrapbook with 11 herbs and spices https://t.co/k0ieLSbcPI pic.twitter.com/gg3NygwFqN
— Chicago Tribune (@chicagotribune) August 19, 2016

A nephew of Colonel Sanders may have shown a reporter a list of the proprietary blend of 11 herbs and spices for the famous fried chicken.

On its 150th anniversary, the Jack Daniel’s distillery in Lynchburg, Tenn., conceded that its official history didn’t tell the whole story of its origins. Mr. Daniel, the company now says, didn’t learn distilling from Dan Call, but from a man named Nearis Green — one of Mr. Call’s slaves.

Mississippi Roast is one of the most popular recipes on the web, an unlikely star with unlikely ingredients: beef chuck, powdered ranch dressing and gravy, butter and pepperoncini. Mr. Sifton interviewed the creator of the dish, Robin Chapman, and updated the recipe, which added some time, a change that upset some readers.

The chef Thomas Keller’s restaurant in Columbus Circle lost not one, but two stars in this review. “With each fresh review, a restaurant has to earn its stars again,” Mr. Wells wrote. “In its current form and at its current price, Per Se struggled and failed to do this, ranging from respectably dull at best to disappointingly flat-footed at worst.”