The Minneapolis chef Sean Sherman finds culinary inspiration in the indigenous foods of the Upper Midwest. As a proponent of what he and other native cooks call new Native American cuisine, Mr. Sherman buys many of his ingredients from the region’s native producers.

The best wild rice in the country really does grow wild, around the lakes of northern Minnesota, in grassy clusters up to eight feet high. The ripe grain kernels are picked by hand, from workers who navigate the waters by canoe. For a less chewy bite, boil it just until the kernels pop, as in this recipe for wild rice with mushrooms.

Inspired by the native cooks who tapped trees to boil sap and produce maple sugar, Mr. Sherman, who does not cook with white sugar, uses locally made maple syrup as a sweetener in savory foods, desserts and drinks. You can do the same, tweaking a marinade or tart salad dressing, or mellowing out herbal tea.

Mr. Sherman works with this lean freshwater perch regularly, crusting the fillets with spices, or mashing the sweet, flaky white meat to make tender croquettes. The fish comes from Red Lake, a commercial fishery in Minnesota run by the Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians, who carefully track the seasonal fish populations to harvest the fish sustainably. Try it pan-fried with herbs and butter or simply roasted in the oven.

The small tart fruits of the chokecherry tree, which ripen in summer, were a vital part of Native American food cultures throughout the Midwest. (The Lakota mashed and dried the fruit in season so they could reach for it throughout the long winters.) Red Lake Nation Foods, also owned by Red Lake members, produces this versatile deep red syrup, which can be used to flavor sparkling water or brighten a bowl of vanilla ice cream.

On Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, where Mr. Sherman lived until he was 12, Lakota entrepreneurs run Tanka, a Native American natural foods company that produces a number of ready-to-eat jerkies using prairie-raised buffalo.

Wild plums may be small but they’re packed with flavor, and when ripe they can range in color from pale yellow to a deep purple. The fruit makes an especially lush, tart-sweet jelly that improves on everything from soft cheese to buttered toast.

