Towering cakes and intricate sauces are worthy kitchen goals, but when it comes to everyday cooking, convenience and comfort are king. The recipes our readers loved most this year prove that point deliciously: All of these dishes are simple to prepare and are the satisfying, habit-forming sort that cooks return to again and again. Here are the five most popular NYT Cooking recipes published in 2016, determined by the number of times readers saved them. More favorite recipes are at nytcooking.com.

When Sam Sifton first heard of Mississippi Roast, a wildly popular recipe on Pinterest made by plopping a chuck roast into a slow cooker and simmering it with a stick of butter, powdered ranch dressing mix, “au jus” gravy mix and pepperoncini, he was dubious — until he tried it. His version has no packaged mixes and far less butter, but it still yields, as he wrote, “a luscious tangle of deliciously tangy beef that goes beautifully with mashed or roasted potatoes or egg noodles, or as a hot-sandwich filling.”

This recipe from Melissa Clark was inspired by za’atar, a traditional Middle Eastern mix of dried herbs, sesame seeds and sumac. Here, she uses fresh parsley, mint, thyme and oregano, as well as plenty of lemon and garlic, as a marinade for boneless chicken thighs. The finished dish is intensely flavorful, and destined to be a repeat.

“Don’t let the one-hour prep time on these enchiladas scare you,” Mr. Sifton wrote of this take on the classic Tex-Mex casserole, inspired by a smoked chicken version Robb Walsh serves at El Real Tex-Mex, his restaurant in Houston. With a few shortcuts (use leftover or grocery-store rotisserie chicken and canned tomatillos), it is truly weeknight possible.

There’s no cream in this luscious pasta by Ms. Clark, just a light sauce made from puréed fresh corn and sweet sautéed scallions. It’s best made with farmstand corn in August, but many readers used frozen or supermarket cobs with excellent results.

The recipe for this comfort food staple comes from the chef Gavin Kaysen, of Spoon and Stable in Minneapolis, who learned it from his grandmother. Mr. Kaysen calls for paleron, the shoulder cut of beef commonly used in pot-au-feu, and a house-made sugo finto of puréed tomatoes, minced carrot, celery, onions and herbs. Our version is further adapted for the home cook, using a chuck roast and tomato paste, both easier to find and equally delicious.

