One of the easiest do-it-yourself projects also happens to be one of the most contentious. Everyone, it seems, has an opinion on the best way to make yogurt, as the more than 200 comments on Melissa Clark’s column “How to Make Yogurt at Home” go to show.

Some readers inquired about the science behind Cheryl Sternman Rule’s tip for rubbing an ice cube over the inside bottom of the pot before adding the milk to keep it from scorching as it heats.

Harold McGee, who writes about the chemistry of food and cooking, explains:

“When you rinse the pot with water, you pre-coat the metal surface with water molecules, and that coat seems to protect the surface from direct contact with the milk proteins when you pour the milk in. When you turn on the heat, the protein molecules take longer to contact the hot metal and bond to it. So less protein sticks to the pan bottom and scorches.”

Most of the comments were tips from readers on how they make yogurt. We’ve compiled and edited some of the most useful below.

If you have your own trick to this homemade treat, let us know in the comments section of the column or on the recipe itself.

Indians can’t live without yogurt. The easiest way to make it is to boil it in the microwave. I have 8-cup Pyrex measuring cups just for making yogurt. Fill it up in the evening while cleaning up after dinner, pop it in the microwave for 16 minutes, let it cool for an hour (pinkie test), stir in some yogurt from the previous batch (or use a starter like Yogourmet the first time), wrap it in a towel and go to bed. Put it in the fridge the next morning. Ladle a generous amount over hot rice and eat with spicy lemon pickle to know bliss.

Rakingleaves, Boulder, Colo.

If you heat the milk all the way to simmering and then let it cool, your culture will remain true indefinitely. You won’t need to buy a new starter every fifth time. The boiling kills off all the bacteria resident in the milk that overgrow your added culture. Also, if you heat the milk in a Corning glass 32-ounce or 64-ounce measuring cup in the microwave, there’s no scorching.

Nirupa Cri, Miami

Use a 64-ounce heatproof pitcher. I use 2 percent milk, but it is a matter of taste and how much fat you want. Microwave a half-gallon of milk up to about 170 degrees. (Over 160 and less than scorched is what matters). This takes about 12-15 minutes. Let it cool to below 130, which is important – putting the culture in when it’s too hot is the main cause of failure. Mix in leftover yogurt with live cultures, pour into jars (like 3 or 4 pickle or peach jars), put them in a cooler with a couple of inches of hot water (I heat it to 160 in the electric kettle and it cools down quickly as soon as it’s in the cooler). I let it sit overnight, usually, but it probably is good within 2-3 hours. If you have an insulated cooler and some clean leftover jars, the only outlay of money is the milk and maybe some fresh yogurt cultures occasionally. I often strain it all day (through a strainer lined with paper coffee filters) to make yogurt cheese, which is one of the best things you can do with yogurt.

Steve

I heat the milk in my slow cooker: 3 hours on low, 3 hours to cool before adding the starter. Then I wrap the whole appliance in a heavy bath towel & leave it right where it is for 12-18 hours.

Mary, Boston
I took the advice of some commenters and did this in my slow cooker. First, my thermometer batteries were dead, and second, my stove was already at capacity with other projects cooking. I used a gallon of organic whole milk, and heated it on low in my slow cooker for 2.5 hours. I let it cool for 3 hours, then tempered and whisked in a cup of plain Fage Greek yogurt. I wrapped the slow cooker in a beach towel to keep it warm and dark, and came back to it 15 hours later, having checked it periodically for flavor. I strained the yogurt for about 8 hours, saved the whey for baking and smoothies, and then had some this morning for breakfast. We just cannot believe how delicious this came out. It is the smoothest, creamiest yogurt I’ve ever had. What joy at opening the fridge this morning to see my hard work just waiting to be consumed. This will definitely become a weekly project.

Korinda, Fort Wayne, Ind.

I’ve been making yogurt for years and have gotten it down to an art that I can do in my sleep. However I got rid of my yogurt maker when I got my Instant Pot. Talk about easy: pour the milk in, set it to boil, let it cool to 110 degrees, push the yogurt button and set for 8-10 hours. Done, all in one appliance. I usually strain to thicken.

Lorraine

I make four wide-mouthed quart Mason jars and a fresh small jar of starter each time. Heat a gallon of whole milk in a big enameled French oven, mix in the small jar of starter from the last batch, ladle into Mason jars with reusable lids and then place in oven with light on for the day. In the evening, transfer to the refrigerator, and the next morning, enjoy your fresh yogurt.

Glen, Salt Lake City

When I made yogurt, I always wrapped my quart jar of heated milk with starter in a down vest and tucked it in a corner where it wouldn’t get kicked or jostled (which can cause separation). The vest kept the milk at a steady temp, and I never had a failed batch of yogurt.

Diane, Camden, Me.

Being way too cheap to run anything to provide heat for hours, I’ve taken to setting the pan in a large “cooler,” filled with water at 125 degrees F. It stays within the desired temperature range for the whole time required for the bacteria to digest the sugars. We strain off the whey, and in addition to the baking and other uses it has, my chickens love it!

David Leeb, Chicago

I turn the oven on at 400 for 90 seconds before parking the mixed milk in there and then leave the light on. If it’s cold, just turn the oven on again for 60 seconds after 4 or 5 hours. Need to keep the milk container warm during most of the needed 12 or so hours. Only use steel or glass container – no plastics.

DM, Tampa, Fla.

Make sure to rinse your jar very well. Any soap residue will kill your ferment.

Ratko, Connecticut

My yogurt is made by heating and then inoculating the milk, then pouring the milk into individual serving-size canning jars, closed up, then immersed in a warm water bath overnight. The jars keep in the fridge for a long time, and handily pop into my lunch bag, ready to accept a little muesli mixed in for a convenient lunch.

Lisa Ouellette, Sacramento, Calif.

I pour the warm milk into quart Mason jars, add 2 tablespoons of yogurt as a starter, swish once or twice with a spoon and cap. Put in a cooler and fill with hot tap water. Put the lid on the cooler and leave for about 8 hours or overnight. You can pour off the whey if you wish a thicker yogurt. I make four jars at a time.

ChicagoAl, Chicago

Choose very carefully your starter yogurt as it will give the same taste to your batch, acid or sweet, pungy or plain. The fresher your starter yogurt is, the better texture you will get. I make vanilla yogurt by adding powdered vanilla and some sweeteners so I can enjoy them without any guilt

Agnès L, Paris

I add 2/3 of a cup of powdered milk, which increases the protein content and gives the finished product a nice consistency, and we’ve found that yogurt made from organic whole milk tastes better than if it’s made from nonorganic milk. We bought a yogurt maker (about $25), and it does a nice job, using smaller containers, which allows you to keep the unopened ones for a long time in the fridge.

VP, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada

Forty years ago, I developed a lifelong affection for plain yogurt after being served it in a college-town cafe. It was almost as thick as today’s Greek yogurt, and more satisfying than ice cream. I started making it at home to save money, using only reconstituted nonfat dry milk and setting it on a porch outside in summer, or on a heating pad with a blanket around it inside in cooler weather. Now I make a gallon and a half every week using organic milk with added dry milk. Heating the milk in a very big bowl in the microwave (for 30 minutes) works just fine. Using a bread proofer to keep serving-size glass jars warm while culturing works best now. We are glad to avoid yogurt that has been stored in plastic, and it is tasty and thrifty.

stillwa2, Georgia

I make yogurt at home from plain unsweetened soy milk, and it’s thick and creamy without any additives other than a bit of sweetener (honey or maple syrup) since soy milk has very low amounts of sugar compared with milk. I do use a starter culture every time. I love it! The taste, the texture, and the fact that I know exactly what’s in it: water, soybeans, honey or maple syrup, starter culture. And it’s cheaper than store bought.

Dr. J

Over time, I have discovered that ultra-pasteurized milk is actually the best for yogurt making: The process kills everything in it so you can actually save the step of heating the milk till it’s scolding and then let it cool down. I use organic lactose-free 1 percent milk, heat it up to 108 degrees F, add the culture (I buy the freeze-dry one on Amazon, but you can use yogurt as a starter; I just find it easier), wrap it in a towel and done. The whole process takes 10 minutes. Never fails me. This way I have delicious lactose-free yogurt for my sensitive stomach.

CinNY, New York City

We have been making it for years and use Organic Valley half-and-half, which is ultra-pasteurized. We prefer yogurt made with half-and-half and use it for everything: breakfast, dips, salad dressings. We find the taste so lush you are satisfied with less.

We use Yogourmet starter, which makes a consistent yogurt every time. We make a double batch so we heat 2 quarts of half-and-half to 180 degrees, and place the pot in a sink of water to cool to 108-112 degrees. Sprinkle 2 envelopes of starter on the milk, and whisk to blend. (Instructions are on the Yogourmet box.) Pour into a super-clean glass bowl with a lid. Place on a heating pad that has been preheating on high and cover with a wool blanket. Set a timer for 4.5 hours, and it will be done. This method works for us in our drafty house.

Malebranche, Ontario, N.Y.

Adding a whole chile (green or red) to the milk along with the starter speeds up the process. It also makes the yogurt a little firmer. Just remove the chile carefully once the yogurt is ready to avoid the flavor from spreading (unless you like it).

Sandeep Gandhi

For years I used coffee filters but recently bought a Greek yogurt strainer, which is a nylon type mesh that sits in a container that catches the whey. The good thing about this is I can strain the full amount without having to deal with multiple coffee filters. Easy and neat and delicious.

Lorraine

Invest in a yogurt strainer ($19 on Amazon). After straining 3 to 4 hours in the fridge, whisk back in as much of the whey as you like to get the consistency you want. This can be anywhere from a real Greek style to almost a lassi.

Fred02138, Cambridge, Mass.

Some people like to make yogurt “cheese,” which is essentially yogurt drained of some whey. There is a gadget called the Wave, with a stainless-steel waved-shaped sieve. The heavier yogurt stays on top, the whey drips to the bottom. The same thing will happen in your bowl after scooping yogurt out. Be sure to use the whey – excellent low-fat protein, great for smoothies.

Malebranche, Ontario, N.Y.

Once you get into making yogurt, it’s a natural next step to look at using an heirloom culture (which can be ordered online). In contrast to the commercial culture, an heirloom culture can be propagated indefinitely.

Meg

