While Pete Wells’s recent review of Per Se provoked heated discussion on the Internet, the critique wasn’t his only conversation starter. Here are some reviews that have generated the greatest amount of feedback since he became the restaurant critic in 2011.

Although a few extra rays of sunshine may have shone down on favored tables, I never saw anybody left out in the cold, not even a sweet and out-of-place young couple dressed as if for church. But if the dining room staff now treats newcomers like long-lost friends, it is doing so at a time when there are very few reasons for anyone who isn’t already a regular to visit.

Guy Fieri, have you eaten at your new restaurant in Times Square? Have you pulled up one of the 500 seats at Guy’s American Kitchen & Bar and ordered a meal? Did you eat the food? Did it live up to your expectations?

Finally, Daisuke Nakazawa walked in the front door. ‘I’m sorry,’ the chef said cheerfully as he slid behind the counter and prepared for work. He had just come back from Pier 76, he said. The police had towed his car. Then he picked up a palmful of rice and began to serve one of the four most enjoyable and eye-opening sushi meals I have ever eaten. I had the other three at Sushi Nakazawa over the next few weeks.

One night I had a reservation 15 minutes apart from a colleague who wasn’t likely to be recognized, as I repeatedly was. We both ordered the six-course $195 tasting menu. (A three-course prix fixe dinner is $116.) Our meals were virtually identical. Our experiences were not.

Other steakhouses can drive themselves crazy over internal temperatures. At Sammy’s, the meat will be cooked. If you have something more specific in mind, if you want it medium or black and blue, then write your request on a sheet of paper, tear it into small pieces and throw them into the air when the piano player sings ‘Happy Birthday.’ 

New ideas fly through the kitchen so quickly, you can almost hear them buzz by. This is what elevates Superiority Burger above what it appears to be at first glance, a Shake Shack for vegetarians. And it’s why going back regularly, as I’ve been doing, is an adventure.

What happened next was captured in a fast-moving video that, like the Zapruder film, I have watched dozens of times. There is a piece of paper on a stick planted in a birthday cake. Then it is on fire. The birthday boy tries to blow it out. He fails. A powerful wind comes out of nowhere. It raises sparks from the fire. The birthday boy’s balloon hat starts to tremble, then shoots straight up in the air like an Apollo rocket. It hits the ceiling. Chaos reigns. Many thoughts went through my head at that moment. I wondered, briefly, why anyone trusted me with an expense account. But the dominant idea was: Señor Frog’s, where have you been all my life?

It’s possible to pass an entire meal in this no-fun house without a single unpleasant incident apart from the presentation of the check. The gas flames in the glass-walled hearth are a cheerful sight, and the view of Central Park’s tree line past Columbus’s marble head is an unbeatable urban panorama. But are they enough? Is Per Se worth the time and money?

