Americans all come from somewhere. Their families may have roamed the continent for thousands of years before the Mayflower dropped anchor. They may have been on the ship. They may have come on later ones, freely or in chains. They may have come by truck, train or airplane. They came. And their journeys are reflected in the food they or their descendants eat. The Times asked 15 families from across the country to show us the holiday dishes they make that speak most eloquently about their heritage and traditions. The stories of these home cooks help tell the story of the nation, the story of who we are. — SAM SIFTON
Egg roll filling, used to stuff the turkey
For Diane Yang’s parents, Choua Der Moua and Nhia Vang Moua, who found asylum in the United States three decades ago as Hmong refugees from Laos, November is the time of new rice, a cause for feasting. By happy coincidence, Americans, too, celebrate the fall harvest. Thanksgiving is a way to be American and Hmong at once.
On their farm in Junction City, Wis., they rub the turkey with lemongrass and kaffir lime leaves, and stuff it with bean-thread vermicelli and shredded carrots, cabbage and cilantro doused with fish sauce, as if it were an egg roll.
They were teenagers when Saigon fell. Because many Hmong had helped the Americans during the war, there was fear of reprisals, and they fled on foot from their villages on the Xieng Khouang Plateau, heading “where the sun sets,” as Ms. Yang, their oldest daughter, recalls her parents saying. In the Ban Vinai refugee camp in northeast Thailand, they fell in love and married.
Ms. Yang, 34, is the pastry chef at Spoon and Stable in Minneapolis, where she lives with her husband, a fellow Hmong and her high school sweetheart, and their two children. Every Thanksgiving, they return to her parents’ farm to pick mustard greens from the garden, toast sticky-rice patties and grate Hmong cucumber with sugar and water.
The table is heavy with turkey, mashed potatoes and gravy. They honor the classics, save one: “No cranberry jelly in Hmong households,” Ms. Yang said, with something of a shudder. “Very sweet.” Then for dessert, coconut pandan jellies and pumpkin pie. — LIGAYA MISHAN
Plenty of Cuban immigrants living in America use Thanksgiving simply as a practice run for Nochebuena, the Christmas Eve feast in which — if you’re at the right house — a pig will emerge glistening from the metal roaster called the caja china, and there will be lots of boiled yuca to soak up garlicky mojo.
Not Margarita Velasco and her family. She left Cuba for the United States in 1960, when she was 24. From the start, her family embraced the traditional Thanksgiving meal. “We always thought if you’re here, get used to it, don’t try to change the things,” she said. “So we make a big deal of the American Thanksgiving.”
The family toggles between Miami and Chicago each year, with Ms. Velasco, her sister and a sister-in-law doing much of the cooking for a group that can include 50 people. Even though the stars of the feast are wild rice, cranberry sauce and turkey, Cuba is never far from their minds. Someone always bakes a pumpkin flan made with calabaza, a kind of pumpkin-shaped squash popular in Cuban recipes. It joins a parade of other, more traditional Thanksgiving desserts, a reminder of the place they were forced to leave.
“Thanksgiving is a day to give thanks to God for all the things we have, despite the bad luck life can bring,” said Ms. Velasco, whom everyone calls Maggie. “Life is too short, and you have to take things with a grain of salt and a grain of sugar and keep on going.” — KIM SEVERSON
Grape leaves, rolled up with seasoned rice, are made with infinite regional variations throughout the Middle East. In Dohuk, in northern Iraq, where Parwin Tayyar and her family come from, eprax is a carefully layered casserole of grape leaves with other stuffed vegetables (cabbage, tomatoes, squash, potatoes) and a row of lamb chops running through the center.
It’s elaborate and takes time to prepare, but eprax, sometimes called dolmas, is always tipped out onto a platter of flatbread at the Tayyar family’s Thanksgiving, joining roast turkey and stuffing.
When the Tayyars first arrived in the United States in the early 1990s, Parwin was 9 and had spent most of her childhood in a refugee camp. The Kurdish population of Nashville, their new home, was already beginning to grow: Some Kurds had immigrated there in the 1970s, while others came after the Persian Gulf war. Nashville’s Kurdish community is now the largest in the country; its people, mosques and businesses are all a vital part of the city’s identity.
Ms. Tayyar is just as likely to prepare chicken and turnip greens as she is her mother’s version of eprax. Either way, she smooths a tablecloth on the ground, and everyone gathers on the floor to share the feast. — TEJAL RAO
Dr. Carolyn Ling is a second-generation physician whose grandfather came to the United States in 1882 from southern China and set himself up as a merchant on Mott Street, in Manhattan. There were other investments as well. Her grandfather, Dr. Ling said, had “interests in restaurants.”
Those interests played a big role in the Ling family’s early Thanksgiving feasts: They ate takeout. Dr. Ling’s father, a doctor who fought at the Anzio beachhead in Italy in 1944 and earned a Bronze Star, loved those meals: capons lacquered with soy, perfumed with ginger and garlic, crisp and juicy at once.
When Dr. Ling was young, she said, her father urged her mother, a passionate home cook and reader of Gourmet magazine, to emulate them in her holiday cooking at home in Forest Hills, Queens. The result was a vaguely Cantonese turkey, the bird roasted beneath a rich glaze of fermented soybean paste, garlic, ginger, soy sauce and alliums galore, then served with roasted potatoes basted in the sauce and drippings of the bird.
It is remarkably easy to prepare, and Dr. Ling, 58, prepares it still: phenomenally juicy and rich, she said, “with the umami of soy and turkey fat.” — SAM SIFTON
All four of Lisa Conte’s grandparents were born near Torella, a tiny town in the southern Italian region of Molise. Together they immigrated to New Jersey in the mid-1900s, built homes, planted vegetable gardens — and, finally, married two of their children to each other, becoming one family.
A century later, the Contes’ menu for their Thanksgiving dinner in Wall Township, N.J., is still determined by that first generation — especially by Lisa’s paternal grandmother, Pietronilla (known as Nilla), whose cooking skills remain legendary well after her death. “No maple-bourbon anything — our flavors are more Mediterranean,” said Ms. Conte, 48. “We don’t even have mashed potatoes. Instead we roast them with olive oil and garlic.”
Lisa’s mother, Carmela, 72, now does most of the cooking, including the fluffy spinach-mushroom stuffing that Nilla adapted from traditional Italian fillings for pasta and game birds. After the meal, appetites are revived with fragrant platters of sliced fresh fennel and oranges, drizzled with olive oil and dusted with salt and pepper, a traditional combination at Christmastime in Italy, where both are harvested in season.
“A lot of people would probably think that’s weird for Thanksgiving,” Ms. Conte said. “But for me, that’s the taste of home.” — JULIA MOSKIN
Last year, Sofía Beltrán, a law student, spent Thanksgiving away from her family’s home in Austin, Tex., for the first time. She studied the South American classics of her parents so she could replicate them in her Los Angeles kitchen.
Her pork roast is her father’s, the meat cooked slowly under a blitz of pineapple and onion until it nearly falls apart. It’s just as he learned to make it from his Ecuadorean father. And Ms. Beltrán, 31, is learning to make the pan de jamón recipe of her mother, Martha Beltrán, who was born in Bogotá and moved back and forth between Colombia and Venezuela before settling in the United States in the 1980s. The elder Ms. Beltrán, 58, thinks of the traditional Venezuelan holiday bread as a way to connect her children to her culture.
The dough is time-consuming to make well: yeasted and laminated over 12 hours, then rolled up with strips of ham and olives so that each slice reveals a swirl of butter-slicked fillings.
When Martha Beltrán bakes it, which is only once a year, she makes four big golden loaves at a time. Still, there may be leftover turkey and roast vegetables, but there’s never any leftover pan de jamón. — TEJAL RAO
Braised pork neck bones with noodles, a reminder of the past
As it has for Native Americans, Thanksgiving has always been a complicated holiday for African-American families. In the era of slavery and Jim Crow, it was often celebrated on another day because African-Americans had to serve other people their Thanksgiving meal. Sometimes it was celebrated in January to mark the day in 1863 that President Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, the same year he made Thanksgiving an official national holiday.
But always, it was used as a day to bring together communities and to eat.
Erika Council, a software engineer who is also a professional cook and a food writer, grew up with a special reverence for Thanksgiving. Her parents were divorced. Some years she ate the meal as interpreted by her paternal grandmother, Mildred Council, better known as Mama Dip, who opened a popular restaurant in Chapel Hill, N.C., and went on to write two cookbooks.
But more often, she sat at the table with her mother’s family, where her maternal grandmother, Geraldine Gavin Dortch of Goldsboro, N.C., made sure everyone gave proper thanks for the sacrifices of their enslaved ancestors and their elders who had battled for civil rights. Without their struggle, the bountiful meal on the table would not exist.
“We always had to get dressed up and read a little speech at Thanksgiving,” said Ms. Council, 35. “My grandmother was very steadfast in making sure not just me, but all the kids knew what we as African-Americans should be thankful for, because she knew they were not teaching that side of the story in school.”
To drive home the point, there would always be one or two simple dishes that reflected the kind of food cooked in the kitchens of enslaved Africans. Neck bones was one of them, served alongside more elegant Thanksgiving dishes as a reminder.
The dish, built from pork neck bones and elbow macaroni, is delicious in its simplicity. The bones and onions are simmered in water well seasoned with red pepper flakes, ground black pepper and salt until the mixture becomes fragrant and the gelatin from the bones has given body to the broth. The macaroni goes in next, absorbing flavor as it cooks.
“That water and neck bones could make this rich broth that would give them enough strength to get through the day is kind of a miracle,” Ms. Council said. — KIM SEVERSON
Filipino bibingka, a cake baked in a banana leaf
Nicole Ponseca grew up on the West Coast with dreams of becoming the next Don Draper. But once in New York, she slowly turned her attention from the advertising industry toward the city’s scarcity of excellent Filipino restaurants. It gnawed at her.
Ms. Ponseca’s parents had emigrated from the Philippines in the 1960s; her mother was working as a nurse at the time, and her father was in the United States Navy. “I thought, if no one’s going to do Filipino restaurants right, I’m going to do it myself,” she said.
After practice runs with a pop-up, Ms. Ponseca went on to open two restaurants, Maharlika and Jeepney, deepening the city’s understanding of Filipino cuisine with dishes like sizzling sisig (a hash of pig ears, snout and belly) and arroz caldo (a rice porridge).
“Jeepney is really a homage to everything I used to be embarrassed about as a Filipino growing up in America,” said Ms. Ponseca, now 40 and fiercely proud of her roots.
During the holidays, she makes bibingka, a cake of rice and coconut milk. It plays two parts at the table: sweet and savory. It is rich with preserved salted eggs and a smattering of grated cheese. It is also standard at Ms. Ponseca’s Thanksgiving table, cooked in cast iron to get more deeply golden, chewy edges. “When it comes out, everyone perks up,” she said, “and all the grandmas go, ‘Ooh, there’s bibingka!’” — TEJAL RAO
Rotkraut, German red cabbage with red wine and apples
“I’ve never in my life had mashed potatoes on Thanksgiving,” Debbie Himmler said. In Cincinnati, where she grew up and still lives, her oma (grandmother) made noodles instead, draping them over dining chairs to dry, then flipping them in a big frying pan with bread crumbs and butter.
Ms. Himmler’s grandparents were born in southwest Germany, but didn’t find each other until they moved to Cincinnati in the 1920s, she to work as an upstairs maid, he as a sausage maker.
For as long as they lived, Thanksgiving was theirs, drawing the generations back to their house on five acres, where Ms. Himmler’s opa (grandfather) brewed cider and the women of the family made the German apple cake apfelkuchen, using apples gathered from the surrounding trees.
On the table would be the American standards: turkey, gravy, sweet potatoes with a little brown sugar — and her oma’s rotkraut (pickled red cabbage), tangy and vivid. Of Ms. Himmler, the oldest grandchild, her oma and opa always said approvingly, “She’s the best eater.”
Only once has Ms. Himmler eaten a Thanksgiving dinner that was not a home-cooked meal, just after her mother’s death seven years ago. “It was horrible,” she said.
Now 60, she has taken on the role of host. Several years ago her daughter’s in-laws, who are of Filipino descent, brought lumpia (spring rolls) to set alongside the rotkraut: perhaps a new tradition. — LIGAYA MISHAN
Bariis iskukaris, Somali-style rice, streaked with saffron and heaped on a platter

Ayaan and Idyl Mohallim started their clothing label in Brooklyn in 2008, driven by a distinctly cosmopolitan aesthetic. The designers, twin sisters who are now 33, grew up in Somalia’s capital, Mogadishu, where they were surrounded by family in their grandmother’s home.

Their grandmother taught them to cook, insisting that they help chop onions and garlic, and showing them to make xawaash, a mix of sweet brown spices and turmeric, from scratch.

“We’re American, but Somali was our first language, and our years there are so vivid,” Ayaan said. They later named their company Mataano, the Somali word for “twins.”

For special occasions like Thanksgiving (which they’ll celebrate in New York with family and friends), they make a glamorous platter of bariis iskukaris, Somali-style rice, the basmati grains cooked in a rich, meaty stock and strewn with fried onions, raisins and peppers, or sometimes green beans.

Stained orange with saffron and perfumed with their homemade xawaash, a pile of this rice could be a meal on its own. Instead, it makes everything on the Thanksgiving table shine a little bit brighter. — TEJAL RAO

Sweeney potatoes, bubbling with sour cream, Cheddar and cream cheese

“We call them Sweeney potatoes,” Maura Passanisi said. Her grandmother Florence Sweeney was of Dutch descent, the daughter of 19th-century immigrants from Hoorn, and the potatoes were her swing at a grand Thanksgiving casserole to honor the heritage of her strapping Irish husband, Kevin, whose parents had fled the potato famine to make a life in America.

Florence and Kevin Sweeney had seven children, and as those children grew and had children of their own, the dish became a staple of the family Thanksgiving feast. Mrs. Sweeney made the potatoes first in the style of many American home cooks in the postwar 1950s, using canned condensed soups and frozen hash browns, her take on a recipe often labeled “company potatoes” in church and community cookbooks. “She was pretty frugal,” Ms. Passanisi, 34, said of her grandmother, “but there were lots and lots of little kids running around, and she made the potatoes legendary, rich, so they could feed a lot of people.”

Over time, over generations, her recipe has changed, most recently at Ms. Passanisi’s hands. It has lost many of the packaged ingredients to become something purer in its sour, silky, salty, sweet flavor, if no less rich and legendary in its power to awe. — SAM SIFTON

A jerk-spiced turkey of Jamaican descent

When Francine Turone hosted her first Thanksgiving dinner in New York City, she rejected turkey, declaring it “bland and boring,” and made curried goat. Friends protested, so she devised a recipe from her upbringing in Kingston, Jamaica, brining the turkey with cinnamon, cloves, allspice and juniper berries.

She has been cooking her turkey like this for 15 years. She still likes to serve a roast goat leg on the side, as well as rice and peas with salted pig tails and coconut oil, and tortellini in brodo in honor of her husband, Giacomo, a native of Milan.

In Kingston, her grandmother would cook for weeks in preparation for the big food holidays, Christmas and Boxing Day. “Some people baked fruitcakes a year in advance,” Ms. Turone said. “Every month they’d add a little more booze to it.” She tried this in New York one year; when her husband tasted it, his eyes went wide.

A year and a half ago, she and Mr. Turone, a wine importer, bought a second home in the Berkshires. For their son’s eighth birthday, she roasted a whole pig in the garden.

Her parents sometimes reminisce about how she used to take over the kitchen in Kingston, starting at age 8. Cooking is a way of “reconnecting with myself and my culture,” she said, and of giving her son a family tradition. It seems to be working. In kindergarten, when he was asked to write a letter to a member of his family, he chose her: “Dear Mummy, I like how you cook. Love, Julien.” — LIGAYA MISHAN

Dudhi kofta curry, crisp Indian squash dumplings in a bright, ​gingery sauce

A young man from what was then known as Bombay meets a young man from a small town in Minnesota. They fall in love, and the Minnesotan invites his new love home for Thanksgiving.

“Coming from a land of spice, I thought, ‘Man, how boring,’” Raghavan Iyer, 55, the Indian cookbook author, said of that Thanksgiving meal, his first one. It didn’t help that Mr. Iyer was and still is a vegetarian. That initiatory dinner consisted of mashed potatoes and jellied cranberry sauce from the can, a dish he loved because its sweet-and-sour flavor tasted faintly of home.

That was 34 years ago. The Minnesota family became his de facto in-laws. His partner’s mother started making him vegetarian chili and stuffing moistened with water instead of chicken stock. “I was blown away by the kindness,” he said.

Eventually, Mr. Iyer and his partner, Terry Erickson, adopted an African-American boy, Robert. Collards and black-eyed peas were added to the table to honor his heritage. Mr. Iyer brings a taste of his hometown, too, often in the form of fried squash dumplings made with chickpea flour, onions and chiles simmered in a cream-and-tomato sauce punched up with ginger.

The dish is a way to bring a bit of the liveliness of Mumbai street food to a staid Minnesota Thanksgiving table. The crisp exterior of the fritters gives way to soft, spicy squash inside, all of it in a bright sauce — which, by the way, goes nicely with jellied cranberry sauce straight from the can. — KIM SEVERSON

Blotkake, Norwegian cream cake, layered with cloudberry preserves and whipped cream

The early life of Maren Waxenberg, who was raised in North Dakota and educated in Minnesota, followed familiar Scandinavian-American patterns. So did the Thanksgiving dinners she made with her Norwegian-American mother: herring and aquavit before the meal, cloudberry preserves instead of cranberry sauce with the turkey, and blotkake (spongecake covered with whipped cream and berries) alongside the traditional pies.

Then she fell in love with a native New Yorker. Twenty-six years later, she has perfected what she calls a “Judeo-Nordic Thanksgiving,” a multicourse feast that she cooks every year for 25 people on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, few of whom are of Nordic descent.

Still, “there are Scandinavian elements in our meal from beginning to end,” said Ms. Waxenberg, 53, a business-school teacher, event planner and serious cook who is fiercely proud of her Norwegian heritage and makes specialties like rye crispbread from scratch. Fortunately, she said, there is plenty of crossover between the two interest groups at her table: “Gravlax, herring and schnapps are the bridge.” — JULIA MOSKIN

Arroz con leche, a Mexican rice pudding, light, creamy and sweet

Sometimes there is arroz con gandules on Veronica Garcia’s Thanksgiving table, the rice studded with pigeon peas and olives. The dish is one that her mother, who was born in northeastern Mexico, learned from Puerto Rican neighbors in Chicago, where she arrived in 1961 as a teenager, and where she lived and worked and married and had children before moving with her family to Texas.

For a while, there was pancit, the Filipino noodle dish, which her mother learned from a co-worker and, Ms. Garcia said, “Mexican-ified over time.” There is always a turkey. There are always tamales. And there is always, always, she said, arroz con leche for dessert.

The recipe is her maternal grandmother’s. Ms. Garcia, 40, the vice president for government and public affairs at the Texas Charter Schools Association, makes the dish with a little less sugar than her grandmother did, which she worries disappoints her mother slightly. And she uses a split vanilla bean in place of the extract her grandmother used because she could not afford fresh vanilla. But in keeping with the original recipe, she soaks and rinses the rice twice before combining it with milk, sugar and evaporated milk. The process delivers a terrific texture to the dish, one that is far from dense.

“I come from a family of proud, naturalized American citizens,” Ms. Garcia said. Her father also came to the United States from Mexico, as a teenager, got his green card by joining the Army during the Vietnam War, then earned his citizenship after fighting in it. “Our Thanksgiving table is pretty traditional,” she said. “But I love that we serve things that reflect where we came from, too.” — SAM SIFTON

