The New York Times has documented Thanksgiving for generations, publishing recipes and advice for the preparation of the meal. Here we offer a dozen of our favorite recipes, contemporary classics from NYT Cooking to enliven your table.

Mashed potatoes may be your go-to, but one bite of this golden mash-up of potato gratin and Hasselback potatoes, from the food science writer J. Kenji López-Alt, and you’ll be happy you bucked tradition.

In this brilliant sweet potato dish from Bobby Flay, maple syrup amplifies the sweetness of potatoes, and fiery chipotle sauce lends a little kick. Sour cream knits it all together perfectly.

For the vegetarians and vegetable lovers at your table, we present this striking dish from Julia Moskin. It makes a lovely meatless main course or side. Carve it at the table, just like a turkey.

Judy Rodgers, the late chef, popularized a dry-brining technique at the Zuni Café in San Francisco. Here, we’ve applied it to turkey with excellent results. No more messy brine, just crisp, golden skin and tender, moist meat.

This marvelously flavorful recipe, rich with garlic and salty pancetta, came to The Times from Suzanne Goin, the Los Angeles restaurateur who is known for making magic with vegetables.

Here is a simple, elegant gravy from Sam Sifton that lends itself well to cooking in the very pan in which you’ve roasted your turkey. Add cream, or other spices if you feel the call.

Sam Sifton’s classic version of this iconic side dish is made with bread, celery, onions, apples, chestnuts, thyme and sage. It is also relatively simple to execute.

What does a Napa Valley chef do to jazz up her cranberry sauce? Add wine, of course. This recipe was inspired by the chef Cindy Pawlcyn, and includes fresh ginger.

Simple is often best, and this classic French recipe for carrots Vichy from Pierre Franey proves that maxim beautifully. Cook the carrots with sugar, water, lemon juice and butter until they are tender.

Gently spiced with cinnamon, tinged with brown sugar and loaded with apple butter, this is as deeply flavored as an apple pie can be, all covered with a buttery wide-lattice top crust. It’s a keeper.

Pumpkin pie made with canned pumpkin is all well and good, but pumpkin pie made with fresh butternut squash purée is even better. Brandy (or bourbon) is a welcome, though optional, addition.

Craig Claiborne brought this version of the classic dessert to The Times in September 1963, and it quickly became one of the newspaper’s most requested recipes. Play around with vanilla, cinnamon or crystallized ginger.

