Are meal delivery kits a gateway to healthier cooking or a nightmare of packaging waste? Are they too much prep work or a means to weeknight time with the family? Kim Severson’s article on meal delivery services started a lively discussion among readers about the merits of the meal kits. Here are some of their comments:
It’s a cooking lesson, which may encourage the buyer to save money by getting the ingredients the next time. It’s a way of seeing how difficult [a recipe] might be and gaining confidence that it can be replicated.

Marilyn Wise, Los Angeles

We subscribed to Blue Apron primarily as a way to help our 8- and 10-year-old children learn to cook. The kids love the recipe cards (with pictures!) and the fact that the ingredients are all measured out for them. After several months, both of them are becoming proficient cooks, which I think will stand them in good stead as they get older. Although I wish the meals had more veggies and less meat, they are generally pretty tasty.

KB, Cambridge, Mass.

I really think most people will convert over to shopping and cooking the way you described once they have had enough “cooking lessons” via these services.

Mon, Chicago

The real issue here, meal boxes and generalizations about millennials aside, is that the skill of cooking is not taught. Nowhere in my education was I ever shown how to prepare meals for myself on a budget, how to put together a grocery list, how to eat in a satisfying and at least moderately healthy way. TV cooking shows set a high bar as well. It’s not real cooking unless you have a surprise ingredient (Monkfish liver! Cardoons! Verjus!) and plate something that looks as if it came out of the kitchen at Per Se, right?

I haven’t personally tried any meal subscriptions, but they sound like a pretty good way to at least learn how to cook a few things. My only issue is with the price - the less financially well-off individual/family that may not have learned cooking from family is still stuck.

Seth, Boston

I’m so glad I taught my children to cook. They know how food and seasonings taste. They can make a meal from scratch. If people would just invest a bit less time in front of TV or computer, a whole new world could open up to them. We visit markets when we travel and love to try new things. Boxed meals could be a great start for someone with no experience, but they’ll just be another chore eventually if the cook isn’t really immersed in the experience.

bronxteacher, New York

Meal kits are to cooking what books on tape are to reading. You wind up at the same place, but the routes are not the same. Cooking includes shopping, looking, feeling, tasting and improvising. To me, this is how you learn to cook. Meal kits leave no room for improvisation.

bjk527, St. Louis

Yes – in the same way paint-by-numbers kits enable one to paint.

em em seven, Peoria, Ill.

There’s something ineffably sad and pitiful about this. Like the students whose term paper on “Hamlet” is composed from Wikipedia and CliffsNotes. (My dad was a teacher, and said he could always tell who read the play and who used the CliffsNotes; even if the former papers were not as well written, they got the higher marks because they invariably contained an unexpected, original thought.) To the other insights, I would add that this reeks of fear of failure. If you really learn to cook, you will eat a few bad dinners (or give them to the dog) in the process. Whereas paint by numbers applied to food will give you a perfect culinary Velvet Elvis every time.

ACW, New Jersey

You can speculate all you want, but I’m cooking dinner. Seriously, I’ll be a Blue Apron customer until they move me into assisted living. At 62, and still working almost 60 hours a week as a physician, I don’t have the time or energy to plan, shop, prep and cook seven meals a week. Bonus: We usually get three meals instead of two from each kit, so there’s lunch for the next day.

KJG

These services have freed me from the worst parts of cooking so that I can get back to living the rest of my life. They spare me all of the time I used to spend walking around the grocery store, zombielike after a long day at work, wondering what on earth to make for dinner again. They spare time wasted on the occasional weekends when I got ambitious and tried to menu-plan and shop for the week – only to find that I had wasted a huge part of my weekend doing this.

Waiting, San Francisco

I absolutely detest going to the grocery store: the loud music blaring through the speakers, the bone-chilling cold of the air-conditioner, the torrent of sensory stimuli, the anxiety of forgetting an item on the list. Furthermore planning and creating unique, interesting meals I want to eat, every night of the week? I resent spending my hard-earned free time in a grocery store. It is not a pleasurable experience to me at all, especially for essentials. I look forward to going to the grocery store the way some people anticipate a dentist visit … The only time I have to shop for food is when everyone else is there too. Busy parking lot, long lines, weekend wasted. I paid my dues eating split pea and ham in grad school. Blue Apron is a lifesaver. The sweet potato they’ve preselected is just fine for me. What difference does it make if I had to go to the store myself? I didn’t have to make a special trip to obtain the unusual and interesting ingredients they bring me.

Rosemary Son, Texas

As the cook for my family, I have to say that these kits are a great timesaver for me. I don’t have to spend as much time in the grocery store every week, and the amount of time spent meal planning has been drastically reduced. We’ve also found that we are going out to eat a lot less since we started using services like Blue Apron.

Erik Faust, Woodbridge, Va.

Why try to fit things into a stark good vs. evil dichotomy? Even for those who enjoy cooking from scratch, there can be times when time is tight and it’s worth the convenience to use these for a home-cooked meal. …

The reality for many is that there are trade-offs to make, and this seems to be a healthy option, where you know what you’re eating, while being able to use your time for something more important.

If you have an illness, are a caregiver, only just beginning to get comfortable in the kitchen, live in a food desert or otherwise limited in time or energy, these sound great!

Ann Jun, Seattle

This is an ecological disaster! The sense of guilt is well placed. Speaking of “packaging,” I’ve had quite enough of “disruptive” business models trying to package their money-making gimmicks into the realm of practicality, let alone civic responsibility. To anyone who has lived in a sane society where resources are used economically and wisely, meal “kits” are an absurdly wasteful and environmentally hostile idea. Enjoy them if you must, but don’t kid yourselves, guilt will be your just desert.

Kevin, New York

I can see why this would be good for some people, but the packaging problem is no joke! I live in western New York. They ship your trash up here! … Maybe they could put the goods in cutesy tiny Tupperware and then charge people if they fail to return them? You would think if they could drop it off, they could pick it up.

Caroline, Ithaca, N.Y.

We tried Blue Apron a couple of times and were shocked at the packaging. Californians are notorious for eschewing anything that adds to the landfill. We compost, recycle and buy organically. Having to cut open the plastic chill packet and put that disgusting material into our sewer system was the last straw. That bit at least could be recycled, but Blue Apron has no method for doing that.

A Reader, California

No matter how you justify it, it’s the packaging! What’s wrong with a whole head of garlic to be used over time? Are we really so time crunched that we need little gloves of garlic packaged separately in tiny PLASTIC bags? Mini PLASTIC bottles of vinegar or soy sauce? Kind of negates any good one might be doing with cloth bags at the supermarket. Any plus toward less food waste is also negated by the amount of trash generated.

Carol Smith, Crested Butte, Colo.

The mantra is reduce, reuse, recycle. Note the first two are actually more important than recycling, but recycling is above trashing it. I just hope people will actually learn to cook and shop after using these services. But if not, that is their choice. We all have our personal vices.

Joanna Gilbert, Wellesley, Mass.

I tried Blue Apron for several months, and I thought most of the recipes were very tasty, original and enjoyable. However, they all involved a lot of dicing, chopping, grating and zesting, and unless you have all the proper tools, that can take a lot longer than the time on the recipe cards. After a long day at the office and fighting traffic to get home, all that prep work really became annoying and I canceled my subscription.

R. Vasquez, New Mexico

I used to find meal prep exhausting until I figured out how to plan meals across the week rather than one day at a time. Cooking a big batch of curry or fried rice or carne asada or a lasagna means more than dinner that night. It’s also dinner one other night that week, not to mention snacks for grazing teens. When suitable, I’ll throw a bit in the freezer – that’s a prepared dinner some night when there’s no time to cook. You don’t have to cook (or shop or plan) every single night in order to have a delicious, home-cooked meal.

For people who can afford it, these services provide a nice alternative to takeout or a personal chef. But as long as they’re cooking, I’m skeptical about the time savings. Even with a meal service, you can’t eliminate trips to the grocery store entirely, unless you only eat dinner. So there’s no real time savings there. And because of the lack of leftovers, the meal services actually sound like more work to me. Yes, your efforts get you a nice meal that night, but that’s it. You’re back in the same hole of needing to cook or settle for sandwiches the next day.

boo, Maine

As a “millennial,” I’ve learned convenience is nice but ultimately harms your bank account. I’m not saying that eating out or getting takeout is a terrible thing two-three times a week. But eating out, takeout and using expensive delivery services like this all the time? You’ll regret wasting that money.

Erika, Atlanta

I looked into Blue Apron last year and was immediately turned off by a pricing plan that reminds me of vacation packages. It comes only in two options: a two-person or family plan. Although single-person households are the fastest-growing demographic in the country (we currently make up at least one quarter of households), we continue to be ignored, if not penalized, by many businesses. What’s short-sighted on Blue Apron’s part is that their meal kits are just begging to be marketed to singles. If only they knew how many times I’ve turned away from a recipe because I didn’t want to be stuck with a large quantity of a particular ingredient. My freezer is already packed to capacity with all the ridiculous food items that are only sold “family size” at the supermarket (like chicken leg quarters).

Lynn C.

While this may be fine for a segment of the population, these are still pretty pricey for the vast majority of Americans – $10 per person for a family of four, and no leftovers? Maybe if you are already a part of the population that throws away leftovers, that lack won’t be a problem. However, this is still going to be an option only for those with well-above-average incomes or for very limited “special” meals. The cost and the very high level of packaging that doesn’t help the environment are primary reasons why I think this is likely to remain a niche market for those who can afford these prices.

hl

It is difficult to cook executive-style food on a working man’s budget. I do appreciate many of the comments defending these food programs, but really, folks, get real for Joe Six Pack and Sally Hoe Handle, whose budgets don’t quite square with the more sophisticated lifestyle.

Tommy Hobbes, USA

We started using Plated last year, and it has invigorated our lives. As a busy surgeon with three kids, I don’t have time to source ingredients or sample recipes out of gigantic cookbooks. I have learned to cook, and my wife and I spend time together in the kitchen, instead of spending money on takeout. It seems as if it would be expensive, but we actually save money compared with takeout three times a week. We introduce foods to our children by “deconstructing” the ingredients for them. We rate the meals, and I’ve gone back to the old recipes several times. It has been wonderful – and delicious. Now I know how to deglaze! And – oddly enough for a surgeon – how to chop vegetables!

Tim


We just started Blue Apron. My husband and I both travel, my senior in high school plays varsity baseball and works. Who knows who is home when? And how do you plan for that? And, yes I make sauce and soups on Sunday. We just ordered four meals, two nights a week. It’s fun! We all chop and cook, try the meal, confess how much each hates kale, and decide this is one we would do again. The price is a smidge higher than the grocery store – but cheaper than takeout. And we consider it a family activity and dining … in.

Diane Burley, East Amherst, N.Y.

Isn’t it amazing that what work women have traditionally done for free is so expensive on the open market? Day care, meal prep, cleaning and laundry cost a fortune to outsource.

Cathy, Hopewell Junction, N.Y.

I find it so interesting that a whole industry has sprung up around what women (yes, women) did for years without any fanfare. Thinking abut what to cook. Shopping. Putting the groceries away. Prepping. Cooking. Serving. Sara Moulton is right. You run out of ideas, not to mention energy. I love to cook. I also work 50 hours a week. It is not fun to get groceries and cook every time. But I cannot give up my relationship to the food I choose, so this meal in a box is not for me.

impatient, Boston

Using Blue Apron solved one of my biggest issues with cooking anything beyond the basics: buying a large amount of some semi-exotic ingredient only to use a teaspoon. More advanced chefs might know what to do with leftover tamarind paste or tahini, but I almost always ended up throwing it out.

Kc714, Ridgefield, Conn.

I love my meal service(s.) I live in a remote area, and it is impossible to get ingredients that I am used to cooking with, having relocated from a metropolitan area. My meal service provides me the ability to cook with these types of ingredients (lemongrass, farro, fennel, etc.) and keeps me well fed throughout the week. I manage to get four meals out of each “meal for two” and I often repurpose leftovers into “new meals” for lunch – a shrimp scampi may turn into a shrimp bisque or a taco. This means there is very little waste, and I don’t have to buy four prepackaged pork chops from Sav-More or whatever and throw two of them away after they’ve been frozen for six months. Additionally, the boxes most of these meals are shipped in are quite sturdy – I save them and use them for myriad purposes.

Elizabeth M, Northern Michigan

My children, who actually know how to cook, use Blue Apron. It’s better and healthier than takeout and a lot cheaper as well. It fits into their busy schedules.

Betsy S, Upstate N.Y.

I’m a millennial who lives in the N.Y.C. area (where groceries are obscenely expensive). I’ve found that I actually save money using Blue Apron for a family of two. In order to eat anything besides pasta every night, you end up buying ingredients to make interesting meals that you will never actually use again (I’m looking at you, giant piece of ginger). Further, because you are given three meals/week, you are forced to fight the impulse to be lazy and get takeout after working 12-hour days.

Zach, New York

Unless Blue Apron is going to come over and clean up after the dinner, it doesn’t address the reason I don’t like to cook a complex meal after a long day. I don’t mind shopping for food on the weekends, and I don’t see the value in having someone else measure it out for me. But if they address the cleanup, I’ll reconsider.

BillF, New York

I wish one of these companies would charge (less) for a weekly recipe set paired with a single grocery list. I hit mental blocks in the grocery store and hate wasting food - I’d happily pay for a series of delicious, inventive recipes that allow me to buy ingredients in bulk and make use of all of them, and gain more confidence in the kitchen and store in the process!

Emily Chaplin, Colorado

If I have an app that allows me to preorder ingredients from a grocery store, pick them up on the way home and spend just what they cost, it works for me. I could pick a recipe, preorder the list, and be done with it. Interposing an expensive delivery wouldn’t be necessary, unless Amazon Prime would pick up the tab (and the stuff).

northlander, Michigan

I’d be interested to see Whole Foods or Trader Joe’s offer a similar product in-store. It could definitely be something to consider on a busy weeknight.

BMT, Boston

I love food, and that includes considering what I might cook in any given week, shopping for ingredients, preparing the meal and ultimately eating it. I live alone and yet never worry about “wasting” ingredients. I simply can’t imagine using a service such as Blue Apron, as to me it seems to be for folks who perhaps are intimidated by supermarkets or don’t know how to find recipes online, much less “throw a dish together.” (One thing you figure out after having cooked for enough years is that most meals shouldn’t need “recipes.” After a certain point, your muscle and stomach memory should guide you well enough to successfully prepare your own dishes using whatever you already have on-hand in your fridge (veggies), freezer (meats), cabinets (rices, potatoes, garlic, oils, spices), etc. And then if you need to pick up one-two other ingredients at the market on the way home from work, so be it. Seasoned cooks (especially those who live alone) also know to cook enough quantity-wise to provide a few meals for the week.

Avina

If you are too busy to shop for fresh food, and too busy to cook it or learn how to cook it, you are already missing out on two of the simple pleasures of life. Try working less if you can swing it. You are not your job. You are you. Live life as as well as you can.

Jack, Montana

I don’t want to have a sweet potato or a leek mailed to my house; I need to handle these ingredients, to feel their heft, their ripeness, allow them to impart their dormant possibilities to my senses as I make my selections. For me, the journey to a very good meal includes its visualization at the start of the process. Conversely, as many here have noted, a kit meal serves a purpose – as does a bureau from Ikea. But something intangible is lost in the transaction.

David Shepherd

The question shouldn’t be “Is this cooking?” but “Is this living?”

Sarah, The Village