First published in 1983, Marian Burros’s plum torte has become one of the most popular recipes in the history of The Times, and it’s no mystery why. There are so many things to love: It’s easy, it’s practically no-fail and it’s endlessly adaptable. Here are five ways to make the legendary torte your own, drawn directly from readers who have done just that. And her original plum torte recipe is here.

Made this for the first time using 4 cups of blueberries and raspberries (mixed). It was perfect! - Jane F.

I’ve been using a version of this for years as a cranberry holiday bread. - Marie Schappert

I have made this with about a quart of drained canned fruit of any type, as well as frozen. I can plums, peaches and pears in season, and if a jar fails to seal, you can bake this cake with it rather than reprocess the jar. - Jennifer Robinson

I add about a half teaspoon of vanilla or almond extract to the batter. This cake is so easy and good. I even memorized the recipe — except my memorization was imperfect and I baked the cake with the fruit on the bottom by accident. It still was delicious! - Jane Eyrehead

I added a teaspoon of finely minced fresh rosemary to the batter… nice, subtle flavor. - Gail

Made this with gluten-free flour and it turned out Perfectly! Everyone loved it. - Suzanne

I substituted 1/2 cup almond meal and 1/2 cup brown rice flour for 1 cup of wheat flour. I also added parchment paper over the greased bottom of the spring pan. It was delicious served warm. - Mari Schappert

Made this last night after tasting the one made by our daughter. Used raspberries and blackberries, one basket each, instead of plums, and 1/3 cup cornmeal and 2/3 cup flour. Fantastic!!! The cornmeal adds a very sophisticated “Italian” character to it, very slight crunch, and amazing flavor. - John

This is one of my favorite recipes and has been for many years. In addition to plums, I’ve used blueberries, peaches, apples and various combinations of more than one fruit. It also freezes great. I line the baking dish with aluminum foil and once baked and cooled slightly, turn the baking dish upside down on a plate, peel off the foil, then turn it right-side up on another plate. - Deborah

Double the recipe and it fits nicely in 13-by-9-inch disposable aluminum pans. - Nellie Armstrong.

Think about making two…one is not enough. - Sandra T.

Make it in any Pyrex, casserole, anything. - Cynthia

Used my pie plate because my springform pan was nowhere to be found. - Kelleryjones

A 9-inch pan gives greater height and moisture to the tart than a 10-inch pan. - J. David Nelson

