Anticipation is in the air, as the city’s ever-changing restaurant scene promises debuts and second chances for the world’s top chefs. These are the openings, big and small, sure to whet New Yorkers’ appetites.
High rents forced the restaurateur Danny Meyer to shutter his signature restaurant in December. To recreate the winning formula, Mr. Meyer is working with the designer David Rockwell.
Old-style luxury from Keith McNally in the Beekman hotel and white-tablecloth French from the chef Christian Delouvrier and Charles Masson are among the new attractions New Yorkers can look forward to this season.
Chefs trained in Paris, northern Italy and Philadelphia plan restaurants in Manhattan and in a space in the Williamsburg Hotel.
The popular Los Angeles sushi chain Sugarfish arrives in New York, and Eatsa plans to add to the city’s lunch plans with customizable quinoa bowls.
Queens and Brooklyn have the most to gain from this next wave of Southern restaurants. Nashville hot chicken, New Orleans gumbo and Lowcountry specialties join an expanding roster of barbecue options.
“Africa has been totally misunderstood,” said Doughba Caranda-Martin III, who owns a tea shop in Harlem. “We have so many complex flavors and delicacies, and I want to investigate all of them.” His new restaurant, Serengeti Kitchen, will explore African cooking, region by region.
Poke (poh-kay) has become the next veggie burger, a suddenly popular dish that compels New Yorkers to put up with long lines. A group of new Midtown poke parlors called Sweetcatch aims to import a more authentic Hawaiian experience, featuring poke by the pound to take away.
Markets, stores and other places to pick up freshly baked goods, meats, cheeses and pastries.
Three growing Japanese chains will open New York satellites, each with an unusually narrow specialty.
After years working for Jean-Georges Vongerichten at ABC Kitchen and ABC Cocina, the chef Dan Kluger plans a (still nameless) restaurant on West Eighth Street.
One well-fed area is showing signs of even more activity: the area around the 20s, East and West, especially through the Flatiron district and NoMad.
With Flora, the chef Ignacio Mattos and his partner, Thomas Carter, plan to add “downtown spirit” to the uptown museum. The restaurant, on the level below the sidewalk, will open next month in two parts: Flora Coffee, for breakfast and simple lunch fare, and Flora Bar, where dinner will be served, with lunch to follow later this fall.
Fany Gerson, a pastry chef who grew up in Mexico City, is already known for Dough, the doughnut shop she founded in Brooklyn in 2010. Her paletas, which she sells at La Newyorkina stands across the city, will now have a bricks-and-mortar home.
This former speakeasy was closed after a chimney collapse threatened the building in 2007. Now, it finally reopens after a renovation, with an ambitious menu, waiters in white jackets and still no sign.
After a two-year wait, Rouge Tomate will reopen in two landmarked carriage houses in Chelsea. Though the restaurant is smaller than the old place, Pascaline Lepeltier, the beverage director, has more room for wine storage and expects the wine list to grow to 1,600 bottles, most of them made from grapes grown organically or biodynamically.
Peter Yi just may be the city’s first tree-to-table maker of hard cider. “I want to make cider that will change people’s assumption that wine goes best with food,” he said. “Just like what happened to me.” His version will be pressed and aged at Brooklyn Cider House, opening this fall in Bushwick.
Future and past will mingle at Jupiter Disco, a Bushwick, Brooklyn, bar designed to evoke “Blade Runner” and the cantina on Tatooine in “Star Wars.”
Lower Manhattan is about to get another cocktail bar that pays homage to the past. The Tuck Room will celebrate the “Mad Men” era in early 2017, and later, the corrupt political epoch of Boss Tweed.