Like kissing babies, eating a regional food specialty (or confessing to a guilty pleasure) is a classic political ploy. It is how candidates show they are one of us, that they like pork rinds (Bush, the elder) or Big Macs (Clinton, the husband).

And where there is political opportunity, there are gaffes. These are a few of the more memorable.

It was called the “Great Tamales Incident.” On a visit to the Alamo in San Antonio, the president committed the no-no of picking up a plate of tamales and starting to bite into one still wrapped in a corn husk. Lila Cockrell, the city’s mayor at the time, explained it this way: “The president didn’t know any better. It was obvious he didn’t get a briefing on the eating of tamales.”

Then a candidate for a second term, President Bush toured the exhibition hall of the National Grocers Association convention, grabbing a quart of milk and a light bulb and running them over a new-fangled electronic scanner. A look of wonder flickered across his face again as he saw the item and price registered on the cash-register screen. “This is for checking out?” he asked.

Jerry Brown, the governor of California and a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, accused his fellow candidate Bill Clinton of improperly helping his wife’s legal practice when he was the governor of Arkansas. The accusation was not substantiated. Mrs. Clinton fired back by saying, “I suppose I could have stayed home, baked cookies and had teas.” The comment drew furious responses from stay-at-home moms.

Leading a spelling bee while visiting an elementary school in New Jersey, the vice president picked up an inaccurate flash card prepared by a teacher, leading him to correct 12-year-old William Figueroa when the child spelled “potato” on the blackboard. Mr. Quayle instructed the boy to add an unnecessary “e” at the end.

At Pat’s King of Steaks in South Philly, the cheesesteaks come “wid” or “widdout” onions, but always with Cheez Whiz (or, rarely, provolone). But Mr. Kerry, running for president, ordered Swiss. The Philadelphia Daily News said, “The Massachusetts Democrat may as well have asked for cave-aged Appenzeller.”

To celebrate Cinco de Mayo, Mr. Trump tweeted a photo of himself and his lunch, proclaiming, “I love Hispanics!” The image went viral, but for reasons he did not intend.