It’s easy to eat great sushi in New York if you’re willing to spend $100 or more. For more limited budgets, there aren’t as many options. The latest and most talked-about entry in the bargain-sushi sweepstakes is Sugarfish by Sushi Nozawa, a New York branch of a Los Angeles chain. But more flavorful, carefully prepared and varied sushi is available elsewhere. Here are five places to find it for about the same price, or a little more.
On First Avenue in the East Village is a new branch of Uogashi, a Japanese sushi conglomerate. The $45 Uogashi Sushi Moriawase platter recently took in king salmon, fluke and amberjack, all flavorful, along with skinny, silver-skinned marinated kohada, a relative rarity on starter sushi platters. The meal started with marinated sashimi of tuna — similar to the appetizer at Sugarfish, but with tuna that tasted like something.
The center of the Venn diagram of variety, value and quality should be drawn around another platter served a block west: the $39 “special sushi” at Kanoyama on Second Avenue. The rice won’t be warm, but the fish, arranged on a black slate, is delicious and often includes seasonal treats. One night last month, the platter held spear squid, neatly scored from end to end; giant clam, chewy and sweet and shaped like a shark fin; soft, fat-streaked hamachi belly; and simmered anago, or sea eel, opened up and stretched out like a bookmark. The sushi bar off Kanoyama’s main dining room offers deeper looks into the ocean with omakase meals that start at $96. It’s a very fair price for such high quality, but there are cheaper omakases.
The restaurant 1 or 8 is a Japanese place in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, done all in white. It resembles a high-end nail salon in a science-fiction movie, but the sushi counter is a treasure that deserves a wider reputation. Omakase starts at $60 for 10 pieces. The sushi chef, Kazuo Yoshida, is a miniaturist whose elegant pieces of nigiri are slender and simple. He uses his knife to score the fish with tight, precise crosshatches. He’s the Albrecht Dürer of sushi.
Katsuei, in Park Slope, Brooklyn, has rougher edges. The interior is bare-bones, and the servers can run around as if they hadn’t expected anyone to show up, even though it’s consistently busy. Omakase is also served, at the tables or the counter, where it’s less frantic. Each fish is seasoned in its own way: a fiery dab of yuzukosho on the shima aji; a salty smear of plum paste on the squid; a shiny wasabi sauce on the soy-marinated tuna. Katsuei is expanding to Greenwich Village soon, which excites the people who think its omakase is one of the best in the city. I wouldn’t go that far, but it’s an impressively nuanced meal for $45.
If we’re going down to bare-bones, though, my favorite is Sushi on Jones. It’s not a restaurant. It is barely a counter, and what walls it has were slapped up around the lot of an abandoned mechanic’s garage in a way that does not do much to intimidate the winter wind. (Blankets draped over the four metal stools help.) For $50, you get fish and Wagyu beef sushi in a fast-paced blur.

Around the corner on the Bowery is the site where CBGB used to stand in all its cruddy glory, and eating at Sushi on Jones is a little like seeing the Ramones play there: Something new comes along every two minutes, it’s over in half an hour, and you walk out carrying a buzz of energy.
