It’s love at first use for many owners of the Instant Pot, one of the electric pressure cookers that Melissa Clark wrote about in her cover story this week, “Why Do Cooks Love the Instant Pot?”

“I have it on the counter all the time because I use it just about every day,” A. Cleary, a reader, said.

Some readers shared their tips for cooking with an Instant Pot with Ms. Clark and in the comments section of the article. Some of the best are below:
I don’t do a lot of ‘dump a meal into the pot’ recipes, which some folks love. The most frequent things that I make are yogurt, steel cut oats, quinoa, mashed potatoes and fajita-seasoned chicken thighs. I use the slow cook function to make pinto beans. Risotto is grand in the IP. I have made some great soups, like butternut squash soup and black bean soup, and I’ve had good experiences making baby back ribs.
I use my Instant Pot to make chicken stock a couple times a month. One roast chicken, breast meat removed, one onion, one bay leaf, one hour under pressure. It’s so nice to have stock ready to use in the freezer for soups and sauces.
Effortless bone broth is worth the price of admission for me. I haven’t used store bought broth since I got my IP.
While a chicken roasted in the IP isn’t the beauty it is when done in the oven, I have become a believer. Searing the skin for a few minutes on sauté, followed by a half hour on high pressure and some natural release time results in a lovely, moist bird, and some good juices in the pan ready to be turned into gravy. 
I’m forever forgetting to thaw things for dinner, so the ability to throw frozen meat in with the other ingredients and have it all turn out just right is amazing.
Actually there are great reasons for doing oatmeal and rice, or any grain. The secret is to do them pot-in-pot. I use a Pyrex bowl, on the trivet over water. I do a combination of steel-cut oats, farro, dried fruit and pumpkin seeds, using flax milk instead of water for the liquid in the pyrex bowl. I set the time (about 12 minutes) and then set it on time delay when I go to bed. In the morning it has cooked and switched to the ‘Keep Warm’ setting and I have perfectly cooked warm hot cereal.
One way to cook very flavorful beef or lamb dishes is to cook with no water. Yes, no water. I would not advise this to a beginner user, as we always advocate to use at least 2-3 cups of water for safety reasons. But once you get the hang of the cooker, you can just use the liquid from red wine and soya sauce or other sauces. As no water is lost, there is enough liquid from the wine and sauces, as well as the juice from the meat, to cook the meat thoroughly through. I learned this method from a friend who visited us from China.
Weirdly, my daughter prefers it for popcorn. (She uses the saute function and covers the pot with the glass lid designed for slow cooking.)
The easiest and most delicious cheesecake we’ve ever eaten was made in one.
I probably use my Instant Pots a couple of times a week. Because the silicone gasket seems to ingest the smells of savory foods, I have three, so I can use one for yogurt and sweet recipes. I make beans from dried, beef broccoli in minutes, and shredded Kalua pork, a staple here in Hawaii. Stuffed peppers and stuffed cabbage made with raw rice mixed with ground turkey are fantastic.
