The following items — eight dishes, one pastry and a cocktail — all reside in New York establishments that did not make the list of my favorite new restaurants of the year for one reason or another.

Some come from places that aren’t eligible because they’re too old, or that were nudged out by other new restaurants I was more enthusiastic about. A few are standouts from restaurants I’ve decided not to review just yet. And one comes from a bakery.

When I close my eyes, I can see each one hopping up and down, waving, calling out, “Choose me! Choose me!” To get them to pipe down, I’ve rounded them all up in one place, in no particular order.

It’s rare that I remember a pot of mussels the next morning, let alone months later. But the mussels at Grant Achatz’s hideaway lounge are an event, from their first appearance in an antique tureen to the final smudge of a bacon-infiltrated cream sauce that you wipe away with a rag of bread ($35).

A distant cousin of pommes Anna, these are little stacks of very thinly sliced potatoes fried in beef fat. The crunch-to-volume ratio is admirably high ($11).

Pale yellow, fluffy, soft and having no thought on its mind other than your happiness, the polenta is this restaurant’s golden retriever. Though it’s easy enough to share, try to eat it alone, ideally on a wet night when there’s an empty seat at the bar ($17).

A Malaysian favorite that arrives trailing smoke and builds to an intense, lingering impact, thanks to a rub of chiles and fermented shrimp paste ($38).

The bakery opened in 2016, so this item is more of an ICYMI, but I did MI until this spring. The choux are vanilla-cream-filled pastry puffs with a surprise on the outside: a crackled, sugary cookie coating ($3.25).

Pan pizza isn’t what New York is famous for, and the grandma style had mostly escaped the attention of chefs until Dan Kluger gave it a respectful spin and a crust that’s airier and more flavorful than usual ($16).

A classic savory crepe, spread with herb yogurt and rolled up, becomes the pedestal for lobe after lobe of creamy sea urchin. Like all worthwhile luxuries, its secret is simplicity ($14).

If this drink — essentially an absinthe daiquiri — had been available to van Gogh, he might have been more cheerful, although it probably wouldn’t have helped his financial state ($18).

The hummus is green because the chickpeas are picked before they get starchy and white, and also because they went into the blender with handfuls of fresh Thai basil ($15).

To the drawerful of spices that go into any biryani, Sahib adds yogurt and milk before sealing up the rice under a lid of pastry. The recipe comes from Lucknow, and it’s a treat ($17).

