A new season is about to arrive, bringing a bounty of novel tastes and experiences. Here, we flag the most anticipated openings and explore ways in which the entire restaurant industry is being transformed.
We may not need more restaurants, but we do need restaurants run by and for a larger slice of society. Pete Wells outlines his hopes for the future.
Nearly 20 years after it changed the way we make restaurant reservations, the company and the new sector it created are still struggling.
This fall’s most intriguing openings range from the modest to the luxurious. Expect reincarnations of La Goulue, Bond 45 and other mourned New York City restaurants.
Credit the stunning views of the Manhattan skyline and all the building renovations: Dumbo is becoming a dining destination. A recent upswing in residential construction along the North Shore of Staten Island is bringing along plenty of new restaurants. And lower overheads and greater opportunities for work-life balance are drawing city chefs to New Jersey and Long Island.
Greek or Turkish, vegetable-loving or pork-proud, this fall’s new steakhouses are a motley lot, while established restaurants in Japan and China are bringing distinctive cuisines to New Yorkers.
Nontraditional takes on banchan, small plates that are staples of the Korean table, will be the focus of the chef Sunny Lee’s new restaurant. David Laris, an Australian with a long résumé and a new interest in healthful eating, will open Eden in Midtown. Alvin Cailan, the founder of Eggslut in Los Angeles, envisions his first restaurant in the city as part all-day restaurant, part “nouveau deli.”
The first branch of Grant Achatz’s experimental bar unfolds its quirky charms here next month. Also, new breweries open in the boroughs, along with two lauded coffee flagships and a new wine-focused restaurant, Fausto, in the former Franny’s space.
Establishments are looking to a host of new software systems that scoop up fine details from all over on customers, servers and sales.
Chelsea Local opens on the lower level of the Chelsea Market, a new food market comes to Brooklyn, quick pastas from a Del Posto chef and more delicious autumn finds from Florence Fabricant. Also, Ample Hills Creamery and OddFellows Ice Cream Co. are set to open factories in Brooklyn.