Each December as I choose my favorite new restaurants of the year, I go slightly bonkers trying to find patterns. It must be a side effect of writing criticism on a weekly deadline, which forces me to focus on the task at hand. When I step back to look at the big picture in 12 months’ worth of reviews, my eyes have trouble adjusting to the light.

The trouble is that my weekly column is far from a scientific survey. And my year-end list is boxed in by self-imposed rules. (Restaurants that opened late in 2016 but got reviewed this year were eligible, while very new places that I haven’t written about yet weren’t.) So any patterns I might discern are unlikely to have statistical significance.

Still, I look for meaning. Does it say anything, for instance, that women are the chefs at four of the 10 new restaurants I’m most excited about?

Is it a sign that the restaurant business is becoming more diverse when only three places on my list have chefs who were born in the United States? That the rest come from China, Mexico, Thailand, Chile, South Korea and Uruguay?

What about No. 2 on my list, Guan Fu Sichuan, the first Chinese restaurant in decades to be given three stars by The New York Times — as far as I can tell, the last was Say Eng Look, reviewed by Mimi Sheraton in 1982 — is that an indication that China’s economic strength is going to work out to the advantage of eaters in New York?

Whether these restaurants will turn out to be forerunners of lasting changes, I don’t know. My list of favorites is subjective, obviously. It reflects my preferences and nothing else. And the restaurant business is still a very, very long way from giving the same opportunities to everybody who applies.

If there’s doubt about that, look at No. 1: the Grill, inside one of the two most beautiful restaurant spaces in the city. The other is the Pool, and the landlord essentially handed both directly to three already successful American-born men. These men, who run the Major Food Group, started with huge advantages. They also took on an extraordinarily complex project and further complicated it by setting their sights very high. And the result, in my eyes, is a restaurant that is extremely enjoyable in all sorts of ways.

This is why peering into the crystal ball makes me cross-eyed. What I do know is that the best restaurants I reviewed this year, ranked below in order of my enthusiasm for them, are an interesting and diverse crop, with something for adventure-seekers and traditionalists, chile-heads and more cautious palates. Best of all, there are a lot of fresh voices in this list. I’ll give up on prognostication now; it’s time instead for celebration.

The restaurateurs in the Major Food Group understand the theater of dining, and what to do with it, as well as anyone. They inherited two of the best stages in New York when they took over the former Four Seasons, and while they haven’t yet figured out how they can fully inhabit the old Pool Room, they’ve brought out the inherent drama of Philip Johnson’s Grill Room design to make a restaurant that’s relentlessly entertaining. From the oversize menus to the servers’ patter to the often outlandish prices, everything is slightly exaggerated, like the gestures of actors trying to reach the back row. Borrowing from American and Continental cuisine of the 1960s, the chef, Mario Carbone, has hit upon a style that’s both showy and substantial. Prime rib, carved tableside by a specialist who does nothing else, gets a whole smoked beef rib in a mustard rub as a garnish, which beats a parsley sprig. The elementally pure crab cake is made without breading; the top crust is a rosette of browned potato coins. The Grill has flaws, including the expense and the undercurrent of hustle, but it shares them with other restaurants. Its best qualities are all its own.

New York hardly suffers from a scarcity of good mapo tofu and Chongqing chicken. But the depth, complexity and finesse of the cooking at Guan Fu stand out. It’s probably the most cheffy Sichuan place in town, although that claim would be easier to support if Guan Fu’s owners didn’t refuse to name the chef in question. Whoever is in charge has some skills. The boiled fish with pickled vegetables, the “homemade” roasted fish, and the mapo tofu hold your attention with layer after layer of flavor, and only some of those layers come from chiles. Capsaicin freaks will want to test their strength against the cuttlefish in a charred green chile sauce that only looks harmless. The service, while not quite seamless, is gracious and solicitous, and the décor — wood paneling, gilded ceilings, padded seats wide enough for two — point to the new money trickling into Flushing. 

If you walk in expecting the cuisine of Mexico, Empellón’s menu may leave you angry, disgruntled or confused. It’s Mexican cooking in the sense that Miles Davis’s “Sketches of Spain” is Spanish music: some of it is, the rest is made up, and somehow it all fits beautifully together. Even the tacos, not quite convincing initially despite their tacolike appearance, are better now and no longer usher you into food’s uncanny valley. Alex Stupak’s earlier Empellóns weren’t necessarily meant for everybody, but this one has a big Midtown space to fill; it needs to please crowds. That seems to have liberated him to make his plates more bright and colorful. He’s still a technical wizard, but the weird tricks he pulls now are almost always fun, like the platter of nachos under a scribble of a sea urchin-butter sauce that looks like melted Velveeta. 

Occasionally I suspect that I and everyone else involved in the local restaurant scene have lost our minds. The next time that feeling takes hold, I’ll go to King. Everything there makes sense. The cocktails are straightforward little stress-reducers, just complicated enough to get your attention. The little square dining room looks exactly like a place to eat. The chefs, Clare de Boer and Jess Shadbolt, make a compelling case for bringing back the kind of refined-rustic seasonal cooking drawn from southern France and northern Italy that many young chefs have turned their backs on. Their cooking is a marvel of attentiveness and balance.

A great restaurant anywhere on the Upper East Side is newsworthy. But Flora Bar happens to make glorious use of the bottom floor of the Met Breuer museum, a brutalist landmark that grows more impressive the more closely you look. (The view is of Marcel Breuer’s naked-concrete moat and drawbridge off Madison Avenue.) Ignacio Mattos, the Uruguay-born chef of Estela and Café Altro Paradiso, does his most refined cooking here; the food, like caviar on a thin, unfolded omelet, is elegant and sumptuous. Even the radicchio shimmers. 

Victoria Blamey lasted just over a year as chef, but by the time she left early this month she had established herself as a chef worth following. And she did it at Chumley’s, the revivified speakeasy where just about everybody drank at one time or another in the past, and where just about nobody remembered eating. Ms. Blamey cooked tavern food never before seen in any tavern on this planet, like a double cheeseburger basted in bone marrow, or a warm pretzel and trout roe with onion dip so well-made it seemed like a hallucination. And then there were uncategorizable inventions like the Dungeness crab potpie, loosely inspired by an abalone dish from Chile, where Ms. Blamey grew up. The interior was brand new, its nostalgia carefully stage-managed and somewhat cloying, but with food like that and a cocktail or two, it didn’t matter. 

Atla is the second restaurant opened, after Cosme, by the chefs Daniela Soto-Innes and Enrique Olvera. Ms. Soto-Innes runs both kitchens but seems especially attached to Atla, and she’s filled the menu with things that the kind of New Yorkers who have time for breakfast in NoHo want to eat. Mornings and afternoons bring enchiladas and other things you might eat at a fonda in Mexico City, where Ms. Soto-Innes lived until she was 12. Alongside these are salads and bowls, as at any robustly hashtagged American cafe: cinnamon-rich chia pudding, guacamole with goat cheese on toast. The dinner menu strolls in after 5, but it’s just as pleasant and untaxing. Cosme is more groundbreaking and self-consciously modern, but Atla feels more contemporary. 

Raised in Seoul, Junghyun Park has a knack for drawing out Korean cuisine’s less extroverted flavors and giving them a little twist. Sea-bass tartare might appear under a soft green layer of kiwi dressed with pickled garlic and fresh mint; coins of octopus dotted with parsley oil may be surrounded by a ring of chopped kimchi and chorizo. Three dishes along those lines plus a bowl of rice will cost $39, not at all bad for such original cooking. Mr. Park’s wife, Ellia, oversees the dining room, setting a gracious and unfussy tone that puts you in the mood to relax and explore. 

This exciting evocation of Yunnanese cuisine is the project of a chef born in a different Chinese province, Sichuan. Simone Tong has a wonderful feeling for the fresh vibrancy of Yunnan, building up tension with salty, hot, sour and sweet ingredients, most of them local stand-ins. Her tribute to a street snack from Dali, a backpacker mecca, uses local purple potatoes and curds from Beecher’s Handmade Cheese, off Union Square. The main event is mixian, the long, slender, elusively slippery rice noodle; their mild flavor defers to the fireworks of Ms. Tong’s broths. Service is included in the prices, which don’t go above $15. 

One dish, a dry curry from southern Thailand in which chiles are permanently fused with beef, is marked “brutally spicy” on the menu. Another, a northern Thai duck larb, isn’t, but should be. The rest of the food at Ugly Baby is more forgiving, but none of it is compromising: the chef, Sirichai Sreparplarn, is intent on giving Brooklyn an accurate taste of his native country’s cooking. Servers aren’t always reliable guides to what’s hot and what’s not. The best strategy is to order as much as possible, then go on a tour of the table. 

